grammars/README.md, before:

# Grammars / syntax highlighting

PRQL contains multiple grammar definitions to enable tools to highlight PRQL
code. These are all intended to provide as good an experience as the grammar
supports. Please raise any shortcomings in a GitHub issue.

The definitions are somewhat scattered around the codebase; this page serves as
an index.

- [Ace](https://ace.c9.io/) — supported. The grammar is upstream
  ([prql_highlight_rules.js](https://github.com/ajaxorg/ace/blob/master/src/mode/prql_highlight_rules.js)).
  See the [demo](https://prql-lang.org/demos/ace-demo).

- [Lezer](https://lezer.codemirror.net/) — used by CodeMirror editors. The PRQL
  file is at
  [`grammars/prql-lezer/README.md`](https://github.com/PRQL/prql/tree/main/grammars/prql-lezer/README.md).

- [Handlebars](https://handlebarsjs.com/) — currently duplicated:

  - The book:
    [`book/highlight-prql.js`](https://github.com/PRQL/prql/blob/main/web/book/highlight-prql.js)
  - The website (outside of the book & playground):
    [`website/themes/prql-theme/static/plugins/highlight/prql.js`](https://github.com/PRQL/prql/blob/main/web/book/highlight-prql.js)

- [Textmate](https://macromates.com/manual/en/language_grammars) — used by the
  VS Code extension. It's in the `prql-vscode` repo in
  [`prql-vscode/syntaxes/prql.tmLanguage.json`](https://github.com/PRQL/prql-vscode/blob/main/syntaxes/prql.tmLanguage.json).

- [Monarch](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/monarch.html) — used by
  the Monaco editor, which we use for the Playground. The grammar is at
  [`playground/src/workbench/prql-syntax.js`](https://github.com/PRQL/prql/blob/main/web/playground/src/workbench/prql-syntax.js).

- [Pygments](https://pygments.org/) — Python library used by Wikipedia,
  Bitbucket, Sphinx and [more](https://pygments.org/faq/#who-uses-pygments). The
  grammar is upstream
  ([prql.py](https://github.com/pygments/pygments/blob/master/pygments/lexers/prql.py)).
  See the [demo](https://pygments.org/demo/).

- [Tree-Sitter](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter) — used by the neovim
  and helix. The grammar can be found at
  [https://github.com/PRQL/tree-sitter-prql](https://github.com/PRQL/tree-sitter-prql).

Commit message:

feat: Add chroma grammar (#3597)
Co-authored-by: pre-commit-ci[bot] <66853113+pre-commit-ci[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>

grammars/README.md, after:

# Grammars / syntax highlighting

PRQL contains multiple grammar definitions to enable tools to highlight PRQL
code. These are all intended to provide as good an experience as the grammar
supports. Please raise any shortcomings in a GitHub issue.

The definitions are somewhat scattered around the codebase; this page serves as
an index.

- [Ace](https://ace.c9.io/) — supported. The grammar is upstream
  ([prql_highlight_rules.js](https://github.com/ajaxorg/ace/blob/master/src/mode/prql_highlight_rules.js)).
  See the [demo](https://prql-lang.org/demos/ace-demo).

- [chroma](https://github.com/alecthomas/chroma) — Go library used by the static
  website generator Hugo. The grammar is upstream
  ([prql.xml](https://github.com/alecthomas/chroma/blob/master/lexers/embedded/prql.xml)).
  See the [demo](https://swapoff.org/chroma/playground/).

- [Lezer](https://lezer.codemirror.net/) — used by CodeMirror editors. The PRQL
  file is at
  [`grammars/prql-lezer/README.md`](https://github.com/PRQL/prql/tree/main/grammars/prql-lezer/README.md).

- [Handlebars](https://handlebarsjs.com/) — currently duplicated:

  - The book:
    [`book/highlight-prql.js`](https://github.com/PRQL/prql/blob/main/web/book/highlight-prql.js)
  - The website (outside of the book & playground):
    [`website/themes/prql-theme/static/plugins/highlight/prql.js`](https://github.com/PRQL/prql/blob/main/web/book/highlight-prql.js)

- [Textmate](https://macromates.com/manual/en/language_grammars) — used by the
  VS Code extension. It's in the `prql-vscode` repo in
  [`prql-vscode/syntaxes/prql.tmLanguage.json`](https://github.com/PRQL/prql-vscode/blob/main/syntaxes/prql.tmLanguage.json).

- [Monarch](https://microsoft.github.io/monaco-editor/monarch.html) — used by
  the Monaco editor, which we use for the Playground. The grammar is at
  [`playground/src/workbench/prql-syntax.js`](https://github.com/PRQL/prql/blob/main/web/playground/src/workbench/prql-syntax.js).

- [Pygments](https://pygments.org/) — Python library used by Wikipedia,
  Bitbucket, Sphinx and [more](https://pygments.org/faq/#who-uses-pygments). The
  grammar is upstream
  ([prql.py](https://github.com/pygments/pygments/blob/master/pygments/lexers/prql.py)).
  See the [demo](https://pygments.org/demo/).

- [Tree-Sitter](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter) — used by the neovim
  and helix. The grammar can be found at
  [https://github.com/PRQL/tree-sitter-prql](https://github.com/PRQL/tree-sitter-prql).
