# PRQL

[PRQL](https://prql-lang.org/) bindings for Elixir.

## Installation

```elixir
def deps do
  [
    {:prql, "~> 0.1.0"}
  ]
end
```

## Basic Usage

```elixir
  iex> PRQL.compile("from customers")
      {:ok, "SELECT\n  *\nFROM\n  customers\n\n-- Generated by PRQL compiler version 0.3.1 (https://prql-lang.org)\n"}


  iex> PRQL.compile("from customers\ntake 10", dialect: :mssql)
  {:ok, "SELECT\n  TOP (10) *\nFROM\n  customers\n\n-- Generated by PRQL compiler version 0.3.1 (https://prql-lang.org)\n"}
```

## Development

We are in the early stages of developing Elixir bindings.

We're using `Rustler` to provide Rust bindings for `prql-compiler`.

Currently using the bindings in an Elixir project requires compiling the Rust
crate from this repo:

- Install dependencies with `mix deps.get`
- Compile project `mix compile`
- Run tests `mix test`

Future work includes publishing pre-compiled artifacts, so Elixir projects can
run PRQL without needing a Rust toolchain.

## Mac

We currently don't enable compilation for Mac. This is possible to enable, but
causes some issues with cargo's compilation cache. Briefly: it requires
`RUST_FLAGS` to be set, and because of
<https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/8716> &
<https://github.com/rust-lang/cargo/issues/8899>, any compilation of a different
target will bust the cache.

The possible future workarounds include:

- Passing `--target=aarch64-apple-darwin` to every cargo call, which is
  inconvenient and can be difficult in some situations; e.g. Rust Analyzer. This
  disables passing `RUST_FLAGS` (I'm actually unclear why `prql-elixir` builds
  successfully in that case...)
- Directing other cargo calls to different paths, such as `/target-ra` for Rust
  Analyzer and `/target-book` for the book building. But one `cargo build` from
  the terminal without either the `target` or `target_dir` specified will bust
  the cache!
- Never compiling for other targets. But our standard tests run for
  `--target=wasm32-unknown-unknown`, so this requires refraining from using
  them.
- Removing `prql-elixir` from our workspace, so that `cargo` commands in the
  PRQL workspace don't require rust flags. This would work well, but means we
  need separate test coverage for this crate, which adds some weight to the
  tests.

If `prql-elixir` becomes more used (for example, we start publishing to Hex, or
Mac developers want to work on it), then we can re-enable and deal with the
caching issues. We can also re-enable them if the `cargo` issue is resolved.
