web/book/src/reference/syntax/operators.md, before:

# Operators

Expressions can be composed from _function calls_ and _operations_, such as
`2 + 3` or `((1 + x) * -y)`. In the example below, note the use of expressions
to calculate the alias `circumference` and in the `filter` transform.

```prql
from foo
select {
  circumference = diameter * 3.14159,
  color,
}
filter circumference > 10 && color != "red"
```

## Operator precedence

This table shows operator precedence. Use parentheses `()` to prioritize
operations and for function calls (see the discussion below.)

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 — the `|` characters need to be escaped, and surrounded with tags rather than backticks   -->

|          Group | Operators                   | Precedence | Associativity |
| -------------: | --------------------------- | :--------: | :-----------: |
|    parentheses | `()`                        |     0      |   see below   |
| identifier dot | `.`                         |     1      |               |
|          unary | `-` `+` `!` `==`            |     2      |               |
|          range | `..`                        |     3      |               |
|            mul | `*` `/` `//` `%`            |     4      | left-to-right |
|            add | `+` `-`                     |     5      | left-to-right |
|        compare | `==` `!=` `<=` `>=` `<` `>` |     6      | left-to-right |
|       coalesce | `??`                        |     7      | left-to-right |
|            and | `&&`                        |     8      | left-to-right |
|             or | <code>\|\|</code>           |     9      | left-to-right |
|  function call |                             |     10     |               |

## Coalesce

We can coalesce values with an `??` operator. Coalescing takes either the first
value or, if that value is null, the second value.

```prql
from orders
derive amount ?? 0
```

## Regex expressions

```admonish note
This is currently experimental
```

To perform a case-sensitive regex search, use the `~=` operator. This generally
compiles to `REGEXP`, though differs by dialect. A regex search means that to
match an exact value, the start and end need to be anchored with `^foo$`.

```prql
from tracks
filter (name ~= "Love")
```

```prql
prql target:sql.duckdb

from artists
filter (name ~= "Love.*You")
```

```prql
prql target:sql.bigquery

from tracks
filter (name ~= "\\bLove\\b")
```

```prql
prql target:sql.postgres

from tracks
filter (name ~= "\\(I Can't Help\\) Falling")
```

```prql
prql target:sql.mysql

from tracks
filter (name ~= "With You")
```

```prql
prql target:sql.sqlite

from tracks
filter (name ~= "But Why Isn't Your Syntax More Similar\\?")
```

## Parentheses

PRQL uses parentheses `()` for several purposes:

- Parentheses group operands to control the order of evaluation, for example:
  `((1 + x) * y)`

- Parentheses delimit a minus sign of a function argument, for example:
  `add (-1) (-3)`

- Parentheses delimit nested function calls that contain a pipe, either the `|`
  symbol or a new line. “Nested” means within a transform; i.e. not just the
  main pipeline, for example: `(column-name | in 0..20)`

- Parentheses wrap a function call that is part of a larger expression, for
  example: `round 0 (sum distance)`

Parentheses are _not_ required for expressions that do not contain function
calls, for example: `foo + bar`.

Here's a set of examples of these rules:

```prql
from employees
# Requires parentheses, because it contains a pipe
derive is_proximate = (distance | in 0..20)
# Requires parentheses, because it's a function call
derive total_distance = (sum distance)
# `??` doesn't require parentheses, as it's not a function call
derive min_capped_distance = (min distance ?? 5)
# No parentheses needed, because no function call
derive travel_time = distance / 40
# No inner parentheses needed around `1+1` because no function call
derive distance_rounded_2_dp = (round 1+1 distance)
derive {
  # Requires parentheses, because it contains a pipe
  is_far = (distance | in 100..),
  # The left value of the range requires parentheses,
  # because of the minus sign
  is_negative = (distance | in (-100..0)),
  # ...this is equivalent
  is_negative = (distance | in (-100)..0),
  # _Technically_, this doesn't require parentheses, because it's
  # the RHS of an assignment in a tuple
  # (this is especially confusing)
  average_distance = average distance,
}
# Requires parentheses because of the minus sign
sort (-distance)
# A tuple is fine too
sort {-distance}
```

For example, the snippet below produces an error because the `sum` function call
is not in a tuple.

```prql error no-fmt
from employees
derive total_distance = sum distance
```

...while with parentheses, it works at expected:

```prql
from employees
derive other_distance = (sum distance)
```

```admonish note
We're continuing to think whether these rules can be more intuitive.
We're also planning to make the error messages much better,
so the compiler can help out.
```

## Wrapping lines

Line breaks in PRQL have semantic meaning, so to wrap a single logical line into
multiple physical lines, we can use `\` at the beginning of subsequent physical
lines:

```prql
from artists
select is_europe =
\ country == "DE"
\ || country == "FR"
\ || country == "ES"
```

Wrapping will "jump over" empty lines or lines with comments. For example, the
`select` here is only one logical line:

```prql
from tracks
# This would be a really long line without being able to split it:
select listening_time_years = (spotify_plays + apple_music_plays + pandora_plays)
# * length_seconds
# Actually it's `length_s` I think:
\ * length_s
#   min  hour day  year
\ / 60 / 60 / 24 / 365
```

```admonish info
Note that most languages use a `\` at the _end_ of the preceding line. Because PRQL aims to
be friendly for data exploration, we want to make it easy to comment out a line,
which requires the character at the start of the following line.
```

See [Pipes](./pipes.md) for more details on line breaks.

Commit message:

docs(book): add a section about division operators (#3603)
Co-authored-by: pre-commit-ci[bot] <66853113+pre-commit-ci[bot]@users.noreply.github.com>
Co-authored-by: Maximilian Roos <5635139+max-sixty@users.noreply.github.com>

web/book/src/reference/syntax/operators.md, after:

# Operators

Expressions can be composed from _function calls_ and _operations_, such as
`2 + 3` or `((1 + x) * -y)`. In the example below, note the use of expressions
to calculate the alias `circumference` and in the `filter` transform.

```prql
from foo
select {
  circumference = diameter * 3.14159,
  color,
}
filter circumference > 10 && color != "red"
```

## Operator precedence

This table shows operator precedence. Use parentheses `()` to prioritize
operations and for function calls (see the discussion below.)

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD033 — the `|` characters need to be escaped, and surrounded with tags rather than backticks   -->

|          Group | Operators                   | Precedence | Associativity |
| -------------: | --------------------------- | :--------: | :-----------: |
|    parentheses | `()`                        |     0      |   see below   |
| identifier dot | `.`                         |     1      |               |
|          unary | `-` `+` `!` `==`            |     2      |               |
|          range | `..`                        |     3      |               |
|            mul | `*` `/` `//` `%`            |     4      | left-to-right |
|            add | `+` `-`                     |     5      | left-to-right |
|        compare | `==` `!=` `<=` `>=` `<` `>` |     6      | left-to-right |
|       coalesce | `??`                        |     7      | left-to-right |
|            and | `&&`                        |     8      | left-to-right |
|             or | <code>\|\|</code>           |     9      | left-to-right |
|  function call |                             |     10     |               |

## Division and integer division

The `/` operator performs division that always returns a float value, while the
`//` operator does integer division (truncated division) that always returns an
integer value.

```prql
prql target:sql.sqlite

from [
  {a = 5, b = 2},
  {a = 5, b = -2},
]
select {
  div_out = a / b,
  int_div_out = a // b,
}
```

## Coalesce

We can coalesce values with an `??` operator. Coalescing takes either the first
value or, if that value is null, the second value.

```prql
from orders
derive amount ?? 0
```

## Regex expressions

```admonish note
This is currently experimental
```

To perform a case-sensitive regex search, use the `~=` operator. This generally
compiles to `REGEXP`, though differs by dialect. A regex search means that to
match an exact value, the start and end need to be anchored with `^foo$`.

```prql
from tracks
filter (name ~= "Love")
```

```prql
prql target:sql.duckdb

from artists
filter (name ~= "Love.*You")
```

```prql
prql target:sql.bigquery

from tracks
filter (name ~= "\\bLove\\b")
```

```prql
prql target:sql.postgres

from tracks
filter (name ~= "\\(I Can't Help\\) Falling")
```

```prql
prql target:sql.mysql

from tracks
filter (name ~= "With You")
```

```prql
prql target:sql.sqlite

from tracks
filter (name ~= "But Why Isn't Your Syntax More Similar\\?")
```

## Parentheses

PRQL uses parentheses `()` for several purposes:

- Parentheses group operands to control the order of evaluation, for example:
  `((1 + x) * y)`

- Parentheses delimit a minus sign of a function argument, for example:
  `add (-1) (-3)`

- Parentheses delimit nested function calls that contain a pipe, either the `|`
  symbol or a new line. “Nested” means within a transform; i.e. not just the
  main pipeline, for example: `(column-name | in 0..20)`

- Parentheses wrap a function call that is part of a larger expression, for
  example: `round 0 (sum distance)`

Parentheses are _not_ required for expressions that do not contain function
calls, for example: `foo + bar`.

Here's a set of examples of these rules:

```prql
from employees
# Requires parentheses, because it contains a pipe
derive is_proximate = (distance | in 0..20)
# Requires parentheses, because it's a function call
derive total_distance = (sum distance)
# `??` doesn't require parentheses, as it's not a function call
derive min_capped_distance = (min distance ?? 5)
# No parentheses needed, because no function call
derive travel_time = distance / 40
# No inner parentheses needed around `1+1` because no function call
derive distance_rounded_2_dp = (round 1+1 distance)
derive {
  # Requires parentheses, because it contains a pipe
  is_far = (distance | in 100..),
  # The left value of the range requires parentheses,
  # because of the minus sign
  is_negative = (distance | in (-100..0)),
  # ...this is equivalent
  is_negative = (distance | in (-100)..0),
  # _Technically_, this doesn't require parentheses, because it's
  # the RHS of an assignment in a tuple
  # (this is especially confusing)
  average_distance = average distance,
}
# Requires parentheses because of the minus sign
sort (-distance)
# A tuple is fine too
sort {-distance}
```

For example, the snippet below produces an error because the `sum` function call
is not in a tuple.

```prql error no-fmt
from employees
derive total_distance = sum distance
```

...while with parentheses, it works at expected:

```prql
from employees
derive other_distance = (sum distance)
```

```admonish note
We're continuing to think whether these rules can be more intuitive.
We're also planning to make the error messages much better,
so the compiler can help out.
```

## Wrapping lines

Line breaks in PRQL have semantic meaning, so to wrap a single logical line into
multiple physical lines, we can use `\` at the beginning of subsequent physical
lines:

```prql
from artists
select is_europe =
\ country == "DE"
\ || country == "FR"
\ || country == "ES"
```

Wrapping will "jump over" empty lines or lines with comments. For example, the
`select` here is only one logical line:

```prql
from tracks
# This would be a really long line without being able to split it:
select listening_time_years = (spotify_plays + apple_music_plays + pandora_plays)
# * length_seconds
# Actually it's `length_s` I think:
\ * length_s
#   min  hour day  year
\ / 60 / 60 / 24 / 365
```

```admonish info
Note that most languages use a `\` at the _end_ of the preceding line. Because PRQL aims to
be friendly for data exploration, we want to make it easy to comment out a line,
which requires the character at the start of the following line.
```

See [Pipes](./pipes.md) for more details on line breaks.
